[Music]
having spent her 18 years as a child of
the state in children's homes in foster
care
you could say that I'm an expert on the
subject and in being an expert I want to
let you know that being an expert does
in no way make you write in light of the
truth if you're in care legally the
government is your parent loco parentis
Margaret Thatcher was my mother
let's not talk about breastfeeding Harry
Potter was a foster child pip from Great
Expectations
was adopted Superman was a foster child
Cinderella was a foster child Lisbeth
Salander The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo
was fostered and institutionalized
Batman was orphaned Lyra Belacqua from
Philip Pullman's Northern Lights was
fostered Jane Eyre adopted Roald Dahl's
James from James and the Giant Peach
Matilda Moses Moses Moses the the boys
in Michael Morpurgo friends or foe alum
in Benjamin Zephaniah refugee boy Luke
Skywalker Luke Skywalker Oliver Twist
Cassie in the concubine of Shanghai by
honking Seeley in in in Alice Walker's
color purple all of these great
fictional characters all of them who
were hurt by their condition all of them
who spawned thousands of other books and
other films all of them
were fostered adopted or orphaned it
seems that writers know that the child
outside of family reflects on what
family truly is more than what it
promotes itself to be that is they also
use extraordinary skills to deal with
extraordinary situations on a daily
basis how have we not made the
connection and why have we not made the
connection between how has that happened
between these incredible characters of
popular culture and religions and the
fostered adopted or orphaned child in
our midst
it's not our pity that they need
it's our respect I know famous musicians
I know actors and film stars and
millionaires and novelists and top
lawyers and television executives and
magazine editors and national
journalists and dustbin men and
hairdressers all who were looked after
children fostered adopted or orphaned
and many of them grow into their adult
lives in fear of speaking of their
background as if it may somehow weaken
their standing in the foreground as if
it were somehow kryptonite as if it were
a a time bomb strapped on the inside
children in care who've had a life in
care deserve the right to own and live
the memory of their own childhood it is
that simple my own mother and I should
say this here she came to this country
in in the late 60s and she she was you
know she found herself pregnant as women
did in the late sixties they found
themselves pregnant and she sort of she
had no idea of the context in which
she'd landed
in the 1960s I should give you some
context in the 1960s if you were
pregnant and you were single you were
seen as a threat to the community you
were separated from your family by the
state you were separated from your
family and placed into a mother and baby
homes you were appointed a social worker
the adoptive parents were lined up it
was the primary purpose of the social
worker the aim to get the woman at her
most vulnerable time in her entire life
to sign the adoption papers so the
adoption papers were signed the mother
and babies homes were often run by nuns
the adoption papers were signed the the
the child was given to the adoptive
parents and the mother shipped back to
her community to say that she'd been on
a little break a little break a little
break the first secret of shame for a
woman for being a woman a little break
the adoption process took her like a
matter of months so it was a closed shop
you know seal deal an industrious
utilitarian solution government the
farmer the the adopting parents the
consumer the mother the earth and the
child the crop it's it's kind of easy to
patronize the past to forego our
responsibilities in the present what
happened then is a direct reflection of
what is happening now everybody believed
themselves to be doing the right thing
by God and by the state for the big
society fast-tracking adoption so anyway
she comes here 1967 she she's she's
pregnant
and she comes from Ethiopia
that was celebrating its own Jubilee at
the time under the emperor haile
selassie and she lands months before the
Enoch Powell speech the rivers of blood
speech she lands months before the
Beatles released the White Album months
before Martin Luther King was killed it
was a Summer of Love if you were white
if you were black it was a summer of
hate so she goes from Oxford she sent to
the north of England to a mother and
baby home and appointed a social worker
she it's her plan you know I have to say
this in the house it it's her plan to
have me fostered for a short period of
time while she studies but the social
worker he had a different agenda
he found the foster parents and he said
to them treat this as an adoption he's
yours forever his name is Norman no
No so they they they they took me I was
a message they said I was a sign from
God they said I was Norman Marc
Greenwood now for the next 11 years all
I know is that this woman this birth
woman should have her eyes scratched out
for not signing the adoption papers she
was an evil woman too selfish to sign so
I spent those 11 years kneeling and
praying I tried praying I swear I tried
praying God can have a bike for
Christmas but I would always answer
myself yes of course she'd gone and then
I was supposed to determine whether that
was the voice of God or it was the voice
of the devil
and it turns out I've got the devil
inside of me who knew so anyway two
years sort of passed and they had a
child of their own and then another two
years passed and they had another child
of their own and then another time
passed and they had another child that
they called an accident which I thought
was an unusual name and I was on the
cusp of sort of adolescence so I was
starting to take biscuits from the tin
without you know without asking I was
starting to stay out a little bit late
at cetera et cetera now in their
religiosity in their naivety my mom and
dad which I believe them to be forever
as they said they were my mom and dad
conceived that that I have the devil
inside of me and what I should say this
here because this is how they engineered
my leaving
they sat me at a table my foster mum and
she said to me you don't love us do you
at 11 years old they've had three other
children and the fourth the third was an
accident and I said yeah of course I do
because you do foster mother asked me to
go away to think about love and what it
is and to read the scriptures and to
come back tomorrow and give my most
honest and truthful answer so this was
an opportunity if they were asking me
whether I loved them or not
muscle love them which led me to the
miracle of thought that I thought they
wanted to me to get to I will ask God
for forgiveness and his light will shine
through me to them how fantastic this
was an opportunity the theology was
perfect the timing unquestionable and
the cancerous honest as a sinner could
get a mustn't love you I said to them
but I will ask God for forgiveness
because you don't love us Norman clearly
you've chosen your path 24 24 hours
later my social worker this strange
manner used to visit me every couple of
months he's waiting for me in the car as
I say goodbye to my parents I didn't say
goodbye to anybody
my mother my father my sister's my
brother's my aunt's my uncle's my
cousins my grandparents nobody on the
weight of the children's home I started
to ask myself what's happened to me it's
not that I'd had the rug pulled from
beneath me as much as the entire floor
had been taken away when I got to do for
the next four five years I was held in
four different children's homes on the
third children's home at 15 I started to
rappel and what I did was I got three
tins of paint Airfix paint that you used
for models and and I was it is a big
Children's Hour a big Victorian
Children's Zone when I was in a little
turret at the top of it and I toured
them red yellow and green the colors of
Africa had down the tiles you couldn't
see it from the street because the home
was surrounded by beech trees for doing
this I was incarcerated for a year in an
assessment centre which was actually a
remand Center it was a virtual prison
for young people um by the way the years
later my social worker said that I
should never have been put in there I
wasn't charged for anything I hadn't
done anything wrong but because I had no
family to inquire about me they could do
anything to me
I'm 17 years old and they had a padded
cell they would March me down corridors
in LA size order they I was put in a
dormitory with a confirmed Nazi
sympathizer all of the staff were
ex-police interesting and ex probation
officers the man who ran it was an
ex-army officer every time I had a visit
by a person who I did not know who would
feed me grapes once every three months I
was strip-searched that home was full of
young boys who were on remand for things
like murder and this was the preparation
that I was being given after 17 years as
a child of the state I have to tell the
story I have to tell it because there
was no one to put two and two together I
slowly became aware that I knew nobody
that knew me for longer than a year see
that's what family does it gives you
reference points
I'm not defining a good family from a
bad family I'm just saying that you know
when your birthday is by virtue of the
fact that somebody tells you when your
birthday is a mother a father a sister a
brother an ounce an uncle or cousin a
grandparent it matters to someone and
therefore it matters to you understand I
was 14 years old
tattooing myself into myself and I
wasn't touched either physically touched
I'm reporting back I'm reporting back
simply to say that that a when I left
the children's home I had two things
that I wanted to do one was to find my
family and the other was to write poetry
in creativity I saw light in the
imagination I saw the endless
possibility of life the endless truth
the permanent creation of reality the
the V the place where anger was an
expression in the search for love a
place where dysfunction is a true
reaction to untruth I've just got to say
to you all I found all of my family in
my adult life I spent all of my adult
life finding them I have now got a fully
dysfunctional family just like everybody
else but I'm reporting back to you to
say quite simply that you can define how
strong a democracy is by how its
government treats its child I don't mean
children I mean the child of the state
thanks very much it's been an honor
[Applause]
[Music]
you